=======================================
Adding Libraries to the lua Environment
=======================================

Dynamic Libraries
-----------------

If you are on a system that supports dynamic libraries, you can add new
functions into lua using the *require* function. Compile a dynamic
library with the function int luaopen_xxxx(lua_State\* L), where xxxx
matches the name of the library file.

Then, you’ll need to tell lua the location of the library in question.
This is accomplished by either setting the environment variable
LUA_CPATH or LUA_CPATH_5_3 before lua is invoked, or the global variable
package.cpath if you are already in lua.

These variables are not a set of search directories, like a normal path,
however. Instead, they are a set of templates that just replace a
wildcard character with the library name you are looking for and check
to see if that file exists. So, a package.cpath that is set as

::

   "./?.so;/usr/local/?/init.so"

would try to search for the files ./foo.so and /usr/local/foo/init.so
when you call require(“foo”). The first such file that is found gets
dynamically loaded and then the function luaopen_xxxx is attempted to be
called, in this instance luaopen_foo (**NOTE:** If you compile the
library with epics, the resulting file will be called libxxxx.so or
libxxxx.dll, so you should include the lib part in the search path).

That luaopen function is then where you would bind your functions into
the lua_state. Lua provides the luaL_newlib function to make this easy.
You just provide it with a list of pairs of function names and function
pointers like so:

::

   static int l_bar( lua_State *L )
   {
       lua_pushstring(L, "Hello, World");
       return 1;
   }

   int luaopen_foo( lua_State *L )
   {
       static const luaL_Reg foo[] = {
           { "bar", l_bar },
           { NULL, NULL } /* Sentinel item */
       };

       luaL_newlib( L, foo );
       return 1;
   }

Then you can use the above library like so:

::

   foo = require("foo")

   print(foo.bar())

Note that luaopen_foo just returns a table with all the functions
indexed to their correct names, which is why the return value of the
require function then needs to be assigned to a variable name.

Static Libraries
----------------

Using static libraries is very similar to using dynamic ones. The major
difference is that you will have to tell lua what the name of the
function that opens your library is rather than giving it a path to find
the library. In the luaEpics.h file, there is a function,
*luaRegisterLibrary*. The function takes in a name for the library and a
function with the same signature as the luaopen_xxxx that we used
before. It would be good practice to just continue to use the same
luaopen_xxxx naming convention.

The recommended way to get the libraries to be registered correctly for
the shell is to use the dbd’s registrar function.

**foo.cpp**

::

   static void fooRegister(void)
   {
       luaRegisterLibrary("foo", luaopen_foo);
   }

   extern "C"
   {
       epicsExportRegistrar(fooRegister);
   }

**foo.dbd**

::

   registrar(fooRegister)

Then when you load the dbd file into your IOC, lua is given the link
between “foo” and the luaopen_foo function, so when you use require to
try to load the “foo” library, it will call the open function registered
to that name.

Lua will use the built-in means of searching for libraries first, before
looking through the libraries registered with *luaRegisterLibrary* so if
you have a lua file or shared library in your path or cpath, it will
load that rather than the static library.

Adding Individual Functions
---------------------------

You are also able to register individual functions into the global
scope, though it isn’t necessarily recommended due to possible
collisions with existing functions.

To do this, use the *luaRegisterFunction* command pretty much just like
you would use the *luaRegisterLibrary* call. Instead of a library name,
it takes the name you want the function to have. And instead of taking a
function that registers other functions, it just takes the functions
directly.

**Example:**

::

   static int l_bar( lua_State *L )
   {
       lua_pushstring(L, "Hello, World");
       return 1;
   }

   static void testRegister(void)
   {
       luaRegisterFunction("bar", l_bar);
   }

Then, you can call the function bar in the lua shell. Since these
functions are not part of any library, you don’t need to use *require*
to load them.
